
---
title: "How to read a file line-by-line into a list in Python"
description: "Different methods  to read a file line-by-line into a list in Python."
date: "2022-10-12T0 8:39:05+030:00"
draft: false
link: "reading file line by line into list"
author: "pavan kumar raju"
---




# How to read a file line-by-line into a list in Python

As the part of programming requirement, we have to store our data permanently for 
future purpose. For this requirement we should go for files.
Files are very common permanent storage areas to store our data.

This  article will briefly discuss methods to `read a file line-by-line into a list in Python.`

## Reading Character Data from text files:
We can read character data from text file by using the following read methods.

`read()`-> To read total data from the file

`read(n)` -> To read 'n' characters from the file

`readline()`-> To read only one line

`readlines()`-> To read all lines into a list

## The `with` statement :
The with statement can be used while opening a file.We can use this to group file 
operation statements within a block.
The advantage of with statement is it will take care closing of file,after completing all 
operations automatically even in the case of exceptions also, and we are not required to 
close explicitly.




## Method 1: using `readlines()` and `list comprehension`:

This code will read the entire file into memory and remove all whitespace characters (newlines and spaces) from the end of each line.

```bash
  with open(filename) as file:
    lines = file.readlines()
    lines = [line.rstrip() for line in lines]
```


If you're working with a large file, then you should instead read and process it line-by-line:

```bash
with open(filename) as file:
    for line in file:
        print(line.rstrip())
```

## Method 2: using `walrus` operator:

In Python 3.8 and up you can use a while loop with the walrus operator like so:

```bash
with open(filename) as file:
    while (line := file.readline().rstrip()):
        print(line)
```
To know more about [walrus operator(:=)](https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.8.html#assignment-expressions)


Depending on what you plan to do with your file and how it was encoded, you may also want to manually set the access mode and character encoding:
```bash
with open(filename, 'r', encoding='UTF-8') as file:
    while (line := file.readline().rstrip()):
        print(line)
```
## Method 3: using `append`:
 In this code, an empty list is created and lines are added one by one.
```bash
with open("file.txt") as file_in:
    lines = []
    for line in file_in:
        lines.append(line)
```
## Conclusion:

Throughout this article, we discussed in detail how to read a file into a list in Python using various methods.
Here we utilized three different methods, first readlines and list comprehension, second walrus operator, and third append operator.